Hey guys welcome back to the course so in this lecture we're going to talk about the relationship between
price and autonomy.
When you're hiring a contractor or an outsourced freelancer so this is actually just a quick video.
I want to introduce a concept that once I kind of understood this it really helped me wrap my head around
what's a good bid what should I expect and what's an efficient kind of route to take.
When I look at the freelancers that are giving me proposals now you've probably noticed right off the
bat there is going to be like a smorgasbord of different prices from different freelancers.
Obviously the price depends on a lot of different things and you can obviously tell very quickly that
place people who are bidding from say the United States are going to bid higher than someone who's bidding
from say Sri Lanka.
So it's obvious that the country of origin makes a big deal in price.
There's also a lot of other factors that go into it.
We're going to talk a little bit more in-depth in the next lecture about the factors that go into pricing
and what you should kind of understand.
So when someone says this is going to take me $20 an hour or you know $200 for your project there's
a lot that's codify into that and you need to break it down to actually understand where you can find
cost savings but also understand whether or not you're getting a good deal.
Now the concept of autonomy is very important when it comes to freelancers.
You want your freelancer to be as autonomous as possible know what I mean by that I mean that if you're
freelancer or your firm runs into a problem how capable are they of solving that problem.
Now you might think to yourself I have made my specification sheets of my instructions perfectly.
There's no way they're going to run into issues.
I have everything planned out.
OK.
That's just flat out not true.
Even professionals even companies that have been outsourcing for 20 years they still run into issues
and they still run into problems that they could not possibly have foreseen when they wrote their spec
sheets or when they originally posted their job.
Just a general rule of thumb is that you should expect issues.
Any little technical bug.
Any clarification issue.
Any type of say even if you're outsourcing your marketing a response that you didn't expect from a potential
customer or really kind of any issue infrastructure issues issues getting gaining access to the accounts
you give them.
There's a lot of different things that can go wrong.
Now what you need to understand about autonomy and how this relates to price is that the more you pay
the more likely you are freelancer is going to be capable of solving their own problems on their own
without help from you.
So let's take an Indian web developer as an example an Indian web developer that lives outside of a
big city that has been working for let's say four to five years and they do primarily let's say javascript
and that person could potentially charge you let's say eight to 12 dollars an hour.
They could even be as cheap as five dollars an hour if they're less experienced.
Now if you saw someone that was bidding $10 an hour it's pretty safe to assume that they're not going
to be very autonomous if something goes wrong their ability to think on the fly to understand your project
as a whole.
Understand the bigger picture of your project and then to make pivots as they go is going to be limited.
This is something that you need to understand when you're paying less money per hour or per project.
They are not going to be able to figure out their own issues and they're going to be pinging you much
much more often.
So now let's use the same exact example let's assume though that these Indian web developers same skill
set maybe they have had more time working with web development.
Maybe they've had more Western clients maybe they live in a bigger city where they have access to better
facilities.
Maybe they have better English skills their price.
Let's just say $20 an hour to $25 an hour.
Now that's probably on the higher end.
But what you need to understand in that situation is that there is an implied association with that
price because $20 to $25 is very expensive for India.
So you have to assume what they mean is that not only are they good at web development they're good
at projects and they're good at freelancing in general they're probably a smart person and they can
probably figure out their issues as they arise.
Now a $10 an hour web developer is not going to be expected to understand who your customers are why
you're selling why you know whatever you're building is a good idea.
They don't need to understand the politics of time maybe even the organization you're running and how
it's going to integrate with them.
They don't need to understand all that.
They probably won't even understand it whether or not this is expensive for you whether or not you have
lots of money to continue the project.
They are only going to be focused on what exactly you tell them to do.
Now a person who's $20 to $25 an hour probably is going to understand a little bit more.
They're going to ask you more questions about who you selling to.
They might even come up suggestions but they might not understand as well as you do and most likely
they won't understand as well as you do but they'll understand it to a much greater degree than if you
had someone there was only $10 an hour.
So what does this mean for you and your project.
Well previously we had talked about what are kind of the prerequisites for outsourcing or contracting.
And we talked a little bit about who the types of people are who outsource or contract and really how
it kind of changes depending on how like how much exercise you have with contracting it really kind
of depends on how many times obviously you've done this before but also how integrated in the process
you want to be a lot of people who are outsourcing do not want to have to check in three times a week
or have to do a significant amount of work on their side to say update requirements update the specification
cheese change instructions provide information to the freelancer.
So really you need to think about how involved you want to be in your process.
If you really are OK with being there every step of the way and I typically suggest that you should
be as involved as possible.
In that case then you should expect to pay more.
And if you end up taking the cheaper option who someone whose price is at the lower end of the range
of what you'd expect well then you're going to have your expectations pretty much broken because that
person is going to be asking you a lot of questions.
That person is going to be constantly coming back to you with the information they need.
There's a good chance they can screw up and build something incorrectly.
You have to go back and fix it.
So technically they are cheaper but if you calculate how much time you spend on it it's not as much
of a bargain as you would think.
So take a second think about your project think about your organization and think about how much time
you're willing to spend on your project and whether or not you're comfortable with having a close kind
of feedback loop with the person who's working on your project and then make a decision accordingly
based on price.
So the main takeaway here is every area every expertise every project is going to have a range and the
more they charge the more autonomous they're going to be the projects and I go a lot more smoothly because
these people are gonna understand more of the project and they're going to be able to make decisions
on the fly that you're OK with.
Whereas someone who is cheaper is either not going to make that decision or they're probably going to
make that decision wrong which requires more effort from you.
So don't obviously just go with the cheapest option go with the one that matches your expertise level
and matches your commitment level.
If you're someone who has lost expertise and you're really committed to this project then you can save
a lot of money.
But if you're in the middle make sure that you work with someone who's a little bit more capable and
a little bit more dynamic than say the cheapest option.
All right I'll see in the next lecture.